Add docs for AIT presence (#3401)
ably/docs: src/pages/docs/ai-transport/features/agent-presence.mdx

---

> title: "Agent presence"

Reviewer: The aim of all the AIT feature pages is to help someone solve a particular requirement in their application, not to broadly document an SDK capability. Saying "the session carries Ably Presence" is not helpful to someone who doesn't know what Ably presence is or why they should care about it.

This page was deliberately scoped to agent presence, because it gives developers an easy way to share detail about what is happening with particular agents without the client having to infer from the stream state or content. I think the equivalent discussion about user presence belongs wherever we think someone might need to know about user presence - probably multi-device sessions, but maybe a new page covering how the agent can use user presence to make decisions? 

You don't need to write the new page now, but the minimum is to get the text and metadata on this page back to the problem solving angle it had before - what job is someone trying to do where presence is the correct approach?

meta_keywords: "agent presence, AI status, presence API, agent state, AI Transport, Ably"
intro: "Your users see when the agent is thinking, streaming, idle, or offline. AI Transport channels carry Ably Presence, so an agent self-reports its state and every client sees it in real time."
meta_description: "See which clients and agents are connected to an AI Transport session with Ably Presence, exposed directly on the session."
meta_keywords: "agent presence, presence API, online status, AI Transport, Ably"
intro: "AI Transport session channels carry Ably Presence. Use it to see which clients and agents are connected to a session in real time."
redirect_from:
  - /docs/ai-transport/sessions-identity/online-status
---

Agent presence gives session participants a real-time view of which agents are active and what they are doing. Agent presence uses Ably's native [Presence](/docs/presence-occupancy/presence) API on the AI Transport session channel. This works for a single orchestrator agent or a fleet of sub-agents, and conveys whether the agent is streaming, thinking, idle, or offline.

> ![Diagram showing presence-aware agent status updates](../../../../images/content/diagrams/ait-presence-aware.png)

Reviewer: did you mean to delete this diagram?

> An AI Transport session channel is an ordinary Ably channel, so it carries Ably [Presence](/docs/presence-occupancy/presence) like any other channel. Use presence to see which participants — agents or users — are connected to a session in real time. Both [`ClientSession`](/docs/ai-transport/api/javascript/core/client-session) and [`AgentSession`](/docs/ai-transport/api/javascript/core/agent-session) expose the channel's presence object directly as `session.presence`, so you don't need to resolve the channel separately.

Reviewer: This opening line has to explain why the developer should read this page. "Ordinary Ably channel" and "Ably Presence" means nothing to someone who doesn't know what a channel is or how it works. Assume they know nothing about Ably and explain why they want to use presence in their AI app and how to get it. You can choose to refer them to the presence API if you think that is useful for them, but it shouldn't be a requirement that they wade through all the Pub/Sub docs to understand how to use the AIT SDK.

```suggestion
Agent presence gives session participants a real-time view of which agents are active and what they are doing. Agent presence uses Ably's native [Presence](/docs/presence-occupancy/presence) through the `session.presence` object on the AI Transport session. This works for a single orchestrator agent or a fleet of sub-agents, and conveys whether the agent is streaming, thinking, idle, or offline.
```

> Presence reports who is *connected*. For whether an agent is actively working on a run, read run lifecycle from the conversation itself — `session.view.runs()` — rather than from presence.

Reviewer: I think people can put whatever they want to in presence, right? So as well as connected I might also have my agent report how busy it is or whether it's idle. I agree that the run information and run state all comes from the run status

## Presence on a session <a id="how-it-works"/>

> `session.presence` returns the same `Ably.RealtimePresence` instance the session's channel exposes. The session adds no semantics of its own: `enter`, `update`, `leave`, `get`, and `subscribe` behave exactly as they do on a raw Ably channel. Presence operations implicitly attach the channel, so you can call them without first awaiting `connect()`.

Reviewer: Same comment as above - don't assume they know anything about Ably Pub/Sub. Document the AIT SDK as-is and refer to the Pub/Sub docs for extra info if required

  });

  await channel.presence.update({ status: 'streaming' });
  const { reason } = await run.pipe(result.toUIMessageStream());
  await run.end(reason);
  await channel.presence.leave();
  session.close();

  await session.presence.leave();
  await session.close();
  res.json({ ok: true });
});
```
</Code>

## Subscribe to agent status <a id="subscribing"/>
## See who is connected <a id="subscribing"/>

On the client, subscribe to presence events to track the agent's current state:
On the client, subscribe to presence events to track who is connected as participants come and go:

<Code>
```javascript
const channel = ably.channels.get(sessionChannelName);
const session = createClientSession({ client: ably, channelName, codec: UIMessageCodec });

channel.presence.subscribe((member) => {
  if (member.clientId === 'agent') {
    console.log(`Agent is ${member.data.status}`);
  }
session.presence.subscribe((member) => {
  console.log(member.clientId, member.action); // 'enter' | 'leave' | ...
});

const members = await channel.presence.get();
const agent = members.find((m) => m.clientId === 'agent');
const members = await session.presence.get();
```
</Code>

> ## Combine presence with active runs <a id="combining-with-active-turns"/>

Reviewer: Why did this bit get cut? How do I find out how to display more detailed agent status?

<Code>
```javascript
import { usePresence, usePresenceListener } from 'ably/react';

function OnlineList() {
  // Enter presence on the session channel.
  usePresence({ channelName: 'ai:demo' });

  // Read the current presence set.
  const { presenceData } = usePresenceListener({ channelName: 'ai:demo' });

  return (
    <ul>
      {presenceData.map((member) => (
        <li key={member.clientId}>{member.clientId}</li>
      ))}
    </ul>
  );
}
```
</Code>

## Edge cases and unhappy paths <a id="edge-cases"/>

- An agent that exits without calling `presence.leave()` (for example, a crashed process) is automatically removed from presence after a timeout. The agent is treated as present until the timeout fires. Wire a graceful shutdown that calls `leave` for the best user experience.
- A serverless agent that comes up for one turn and tears down should enter and leave presence per turn; entering once and leaving once at the end is fine for a long-running agent.

> - Presence updates do not guarantee strict ordering with channel messages. A `streaming` presence update sometimes arrives slightly after the first token. Drive the UI off `session.view.runs()` for run-level state (active, suspended, terminal) and use presence for higher-level status the agent self-reports.

Reviewer: Is this not true? Wondering why it got cut
